syllabus.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Syllabus
group: navigation
---

## ELEC 327: Digital Systems Laboratory (Spring 2017)

### Syllabus

***

**Instructor:**
Caleb Kemere  
Office: BRC 727  
Office Hours: (please verify via email) Monday, Wednesday 9:00-10:00am (RMC Coffee House)  
caleb.kemere@rice.edu

**Lab Assistants:**
  - TBD

<!--   - Xin Huang ( [xyh1](mailto:xyh1@rice.edu)) -- Office hours Monday 2-5:30 pm / Friday 8:30-10 am
  - Michael Tsehaie ( [mht4](mailto:mht4@rice.edu))  -- Office hours Monday 2-5 pm
  - Stephen Xia ( [sx7](mailto:sx7@rice.edu)) -- Office hours Wednesdays 8-10 pm
  - Daniel Zdeblick ( [djz3](mailto:djz3@rice.edu)) -- Office hours Friday 3-5 pm
  -->

Additional Lab office hours may be requested on Piazza

**Grader:**
  - TBD

---

**Class Hours:** Tuesday, Thursday 9:25-10:50 Room AL 121 (subject to change)  
Note – after spring break lectures will shift to about once per week. Students are expected to spend significant out-of-class time (~10 hours per week) working on lab assignments.

**Lab Help Sessions:** See Lab Assistant hours or by request on [Piazza](https://piazza.com/class/ijk6s504wdz2uw) or through email  
Help sessions held in lab room A124                                                                                     
Lab Access Keypad Code: ...-- -.... ----. ----. #

---

**Course website:**  
We use 3 different digital resources:

1. The primary location assignments and lecture notes (and other resources) is the course
website – [http://elec327.github.io](http://elec327.github.io)
2. We use Piazza ([http://piazza.com](http://piazza.com)) for announcements and for
   communication. If you have specific questions about course content or assignments, please post
   them on Piazza. As a corollary, you may find it useful to check for answers as questions
   arise.
3. We use Owlspace for assignment submission and for posting rubrics for peer-grading.

---

**Course Description:** One of the most critical aspects of modern computer systems involves interfacing with the world. This course will focus on how power-efficient user-facing systems are built.

**Objective:** Students should learn the fundamentals of embedded system programming and feel
competent to design, build, and manufacture their own embedded devices. &nbsp;Furthermore,
students should understand how embedded systems interface with external peripheral devices.
Students should understand how application-specific blocks enable modern commercial devices.
Finally, students should understand how to design and build their own embedded systems
including printed-circuit board design and assembly.

**Outcome:** Students completing the course should be able to:

1. Identify the key blocks in an embedded system
2. Utilize software tools to program embedded devices
3. Design and implement a real-time sensor processing system
4. Utilize software tools to design printed circuit boards
5. Assemble functional integrated systems

---

**Prerequisites:** ELEC 220. Also useful are 240 and 241.

**Grading:** Grades will be based on: approximately eight lab modules (60%), a midterm project
(15% each), and a final project (25%). Late assignments may be accepted (with penalty), except
for printed circuit board orders , where late submissions may not be accepted. Students wishing
to submit late assignments should contact the instructor prior to the due date.

**Honor code:**  You are encouraged to work **with** other students in ELEC327 on the labs. Each
student should turn in their own lab writeup (except for midterm and final project, which
should be done in pairs). I would like you to write your own code and (especially) comments for
the labs.

**Required Textbooks and Supplies:**

No textbook is required. Students will be provided with one MSP430-G2553
Launchpad and an associated "Sidekick" kit which contains a solderless breadboard
and jumper wires. More jumpers will be available in lab. It is recommended
that students procure a larger solderless breadboard - they can be purchased,
for example, on Amazon for $30-40.

**Lab Cleanliness:**

Historically, the lab space has not been maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
Starting in 2017, we will implement spot inspections and **class-wide grade
deductions** to try to ensure that a high quality working and learning environment
is maintained.

**Waste:** In the process of learning how to assemble (i.e., solder) surface mount devices,
there has been not-insignificant waste, where things end up on the floor. While
we would prefer to avoid artificially limiting students supplies, we will do so
if waste is not contained.

Commit message:

Updated Labbies and added canvas link

syllabus.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Syllabus
group: navigation
---

## ELEC 327: Digital Systems Laboratory (Spring 2017)

### Syllabus

***

**Instructor:**
Caleb Kemere  
Office: BRC 727  
Office Hours: (please verify via email) Monday, Wednesday 9:00-10:00am (RMC Coffee House)  
caleb.kemere@rice.edu

**Lab Assistants:**
  - Alice Xie ( [zx7](mailto:zx7@rice.edu))
  - Cody Peterson ( [cmp8](mailto:cmp8@rice.edu))
  - Emilio Del Vecchio ( [edd5](mailto:edd5@rice.edu))
  - Greg Harper ( [gdh3](mailto:gdh3@rice.edu))
  - Keiko Kaplan ( [kfk3](mailto:kfk3@rice.edu))
  - Kevin Lin ( [kevinlin](mailto:kevinlin@rice.edu))
  - Randy Zhang ( [xz33](mailto:xz33@rice.edu))

** Lab Office Hours: **
  - MW 3-5 pm
  - Sunday 7-9 pm
  - Tu/Th 7-9 pm

Additional Lab office hours may be requested on Canvas

**Grader:**
  - TBD

---

**Class Hours:** Tuesday, Thursday 9:25-10:50 Room AL 121 (subject to change)  
Note – after spring break lectures will shift to about once per week. Students are expected to spend significant out-of-class time (~10 hours per week) working on lab assignments.

**Lab Help Sessions:** See Lab Assistant hours or by request on [Piazza](https://piazza.com/class/ijk6s504wdz2uw) or through email  
Help sessions held in lab room A124                                                                                     
Lab Access Keypad Code: ...-- -.... ----. ----. #

---

**Course website:**  
We use 2 different digital resources:

1. The primary location assignments and lecture notes (and other resources) is the course
website – [http://elec327.github.io](http://elec327.github.io)
2. We use Canvas ([https://canvas.rice.edu/courses/2062](https://canvas.rice.edu/courses/2062))
for announcements and for communication. If you have specific questions about course content or
assignments, please post them on Canvas. As a corollary, you may find it useful to check for
answers as questions arise.
3. We additionally use Canvas for assignment submission and for posting rubrics for peer-grading.

---

**Course Description:** One of the most critical aspects of modern computer systems involves
interfacing with the world. This course will focus on how power-efficient user-facing systems
are built.

**Objective:** Students should learn the fundamentals of embedded system programming and feel
competent to design, build, and manufacture their own embedded devices. &nbsp;Furthermore,
students should understand how embedded systems interface with external peripheral devices.
Students should understand how application-specific blocks enable modern commercial devices.
Finally, students should understand how to design and build their own embedded systems
including printed-circuit board design and assembly.

**Outcome:** Students completing the course should be able to:

1. Identify the key blocks in an embedded system
2. Utilize software tools to program embedded devices
3. Design and implement a real-time sensor processing system
4. Utilize software tools to design printed circuit boards
5. Assemble functional integrated systems

---

**Prerequisites:** ELEC 220. Also useful are 240 and 241.

**Grading:** Grades will be based on: approximately eight lab modules (60%), a midterm project
(15% each), and a final project (25%). Late assignments may be accepted (with penalty), except
for printed circuit board orders , where late submissions may not be accepted. Students wishing
to submit late assignments should contact the instructor prior to the due date.

**Honor code:**  You are encouraged to work **with** other students in ELEC327 on the labs. Each
student should turn in their own lab writeup (except for midterm and final project, which
should be done in pairs). I would like you to write your own code and (especially) comments for
the labs.

**Required Textbooks and Supplies:**

No textbook is required. Students will be provided with one MSP430-G2553
Launchpad and an associated "Sidekick" kit which contains a solderless breadboard
and jumper wires. More jumpers will be available in lab. It is recommended
that students procure a larger solderless breadboard - they can be purchased,
for example, on Amazon for $30-40.

**Lab Cleanliness:**

Historically, the lab space has not been maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
Starting in 2017, we will implement spot inspections and **class-wide grade
deductions** to try to ensure that a high quality working and learning environment
is maintained.

**Waste:** In the process of learning how to assemble (i.e., solder) surface mount devices,
there has been not-insignificant waste, where things end up on the floor. While
we would prefer to avoid artificially limiting students supplies, we will do so
if waste is not contained.
